---
title: "intro"
bg: black     
color: white  #text color
fa-icon: linux
---

# Introduction: basic linux knowledge

- This is probably the most important lesson you will ever learn on Linux: man pages are your best friend! Learn to read them. Learn to understand them. Learn to love them.

To access a man page on any linux program just type:

`$ man <program>`

E.g:

{% highlight text %}
$ man ps
PS(1)                                        User Commands                                       PS(1)

NAME
       ps - report a snapshot of the current processes.

SYNOPSIS
       ps [options]

DESCRIPTION
       ps displays information about a selection of the active processes.  If you want a repetitive
       update of the selection and the displayed information, use top(1) instead.

       This version of ps accepts several kinds of options:

       1   UNIX options, which may be grouped and must be preceded by a dash.
       2   BSD options, which may be grouped and must not be used with a dash.
       3   GNU long options, which are preceded by two dashes.

{% endhighlight %}

- To view a short information on any program:

`$ whatis <program>`

- You can also find out where it is located by typing:

`$ whereis <program>`

- To change user: 

`$ sudo -u <user>`

- To change user to superuser (root):

`$ sudo su`

Attention: This is not recommended since as a superuser you have total control of your system, hence you can end up fucking it badly.

- "/" represents the root directory. 

- "~" is an alias for your user's home directory, which usually is: /home/youruser/.

- "." represents the current directory

- To decompress a tarball:

`tar -vzx <compressed-file.tar.gz>`

Note: Flag **-v** is for verbosity.

- To see your session history:

`history`

Pretty useful stuff:

- `|` is a piping operator. It is used for inserting the output of a program into the input of another program.

E.g:

Listing all process called "init":

`ps -aux | grep init`

- You can quickly write something into a file by doing:

`echo "any random sentence" >> any-random-file.txt`

The '>>' operator will concatenate the sentence to the end of the file.

BE CAREFUL not to use '>' instead of '>>' since the former will OVERWRITE the content of the file instead of adding the sentence to it.

- You can call a previously used command pra typing "!" plus the initials of the said program. 

For example, let us say you want to edit .bashrc and then open it to edit again:

{% highlight text %}
vim ~/.bashrc
exec bash
!vim #This will execute the last command on history with the "vim" initials
{% endhighlight %}

- `uname -a` will tell you information about your system

- `df -h` will tell you about your file system disk space
